---
layout: post
title: On Unity
author: Rose
---

Many so-called “leftists” in the US are crying out about “unity”, or “leftist unity”. But what do they really mean by this? Is this a valid slogan? What is the Marxist-Leninst attitude towards “unity”?

This slogan for “unity” is most often advanced by eclectic socialists, anarchists, and radical liberals. It is typically in response to what they view as “infighting”. When they see a revolutionary accosting a social democrat, a marxist arguing with an anarchist, etc., what they see is two “radicals” with the same aims and ideas, just with a small difference in tactics. They think that since we both vaguely have issues with the “system”, that we must ultimately be the same.

But what they are really saying when they cry out against “infighting” is “Why are you calling out our attempts (and hitherto success) at corrupting the proletarian movement? Stop calling out our sabotage!” It is “their” ideas because “their” ideas are bourgeois ideas. They are saboteurs because they are workers who corrupt the movement with bourgeois ideas. As conveyors and representatives of bourgeois ideas, they are real enemies of the movement. It goes without saying that enemies are not allies, let alone “with us”. You cannot fight “inwards” against someone who is outside the real movement.

Some might say that this collaboration with and tolerance of opportunist elements in the movement is not only acceptable, but *necessary*, because “the ‘leftist’ movement in amerika is too weak, too small, and too unorganized to fight each other”. We say this is outrageous!! This amounts to nothing but a tautology! It amounts to nothing more than saying “we must accept our disunity because we are disunited”! A large part of the very reason for the disunity in the working class movement in amerika is due to these deviations which have sabotaged or derailed the movement.

Any class-conscious worker should be able to see through this farce, if only we know our history. Look at the liquidation of the CPUSA. Should not the CPUSA have purged the liquidationists and corrected course onto a genuinely correct Marxist-Leninist line? Or did they make the correct decision accepting and tolerating the opportunists (resulting in the liquidation of the party, and thereby going from ~80,000 to ~45,000 members and completely losing the trust of the proletariat). The answer is obvious. The CPUSA’s tolerance of disunity, of opportunist elements, of non Marxist-Leninist ideas, led it to be abandoned by the workers and a shell of its former self.

At best, the slogan is meant in the sense that “we must set aside our differences and work together”. If we are to take this in its best meaning, it approximates a better slogan, “we must have unity of action”. But they forget that true unity of action requires unity of will. If there is not a unity of will, then when it comes to action, you will get individuals with deviations in aims, who will inevitably deviate in their actions–some may engage in adventurism, some may form factions and divide, some may make non-necessary concessions, etc., all of which will damage or corrupt the movement.

One must be blind to believe that the difference between Marxists and anarchists, between revolutionaries and reformists, between internationalists and third-worldists, or even between Leninists and Maoists, is merely a matter of tactics. This could not be further from the truth. As Mao Zedong once correctly said, “every kind of thinking, without exception, is stamped with the brand of a class” (*On Practice*).

These deviations have a real class content, and represent influence from various sectors of the bourgeoisie. In his later life, Engels began to recognize these harmful deviations (anarchism, opportunism) in the labor movement, and identified their source as bourgeois influence. He called them the “bourgeois labor party”. He identified that these incorrect tendencies came from the workers assimilating bourgeois ideas, namely as a course of being bribed into it by the bourgeoisie. Lenin then came to better elaborate on this phenomenon as a feature of monopoly capitalism, and especially of the imperialist stage of capitalism (which Engels had not lived long enough to witness). He came to better describe the exact source of this “bourgeois labor party”: monopoly creates super-profits by the super-exploitation of the working class in oppressed nations, which can then be used to bribe the workers and labor officials of the imperialist country into complacency or even support.

Mass-Line theory (often attributed to Mao, although in truth he only explicated what the bolsheviks had already been doing) has an important slogan: “win the advanced workers to socialism, influence the intermediate, and isolate the backwards”. Mass Line isn’t necessarily about unity–it's more about staying in touch with the workers. But ultimately, this slogan gets at the essence of what the real slogan for unity must entail. We must unite the advanced workers under a truly correct and truly scientific revolutionary theory and party (based in practice), and reject the reactionaries and their reactionary “theories”–opportunists, anarchists, third-worldists, etc. We must *consolidate* the movement, not coalesce.

In *Imperialism and the Split in Socialism*, Lenin concludes by writing “The only Marxist line in the world labor movement is to explain to the masses the inevitability and necessity of breaking with opportunism, to educate them for revolution by waging a relentless struggle against opportunism…” We must not reconcile with the opportunist workers, but *break* with them. We must appeal to the “lowest masses”, those who have not been infected by bourgeois ideas, or are truly ready and willing to break with them and embrace the immortal science of Marxism-Leninism.

Let us take a small-scale example. Say there is a factory which is not unionized, and there is talk among the workers about gaining higher wages. All workers are agreed that they would like better wages, but some (the higher-paid workers with strong benefits) think they should appeal to the boss individually, some think they should take the boss’s wife hostage, others think they should go on strike, and the rest (a majority) are not sure. It would be egregious to declare that these workers should somehow simply move forward, each on their own or in their own factions and with their own ideas. Those who appeal to the boss would be ineffective at best, those who take the wife hostage will get the police involved and escalate, and the strike would be only a few people. Instead, the workers must unite and act as one, with one will. The workers who (correctly) wish to strike must appeal to the undecided workers and must expose the errors and treachery of the other factions so as to consolidate workers under the correct line.

“There can and must be unity among all consistent Marxists … Unity is a great thing and a great slogan. But what the workers’ cause needs is the unity of Marxists, not unity between Marxists, and opponents and distorters of Marxism” (Lenin, *Unity*)

Unity does not mean accepting and collaborating with opportunists. It in fact means *combatting* opportunists, revisionists, and enemies of marxism; and instead *actually uniting* under a truly revolutionary, truly scientific theory and practice: the revolutionary science of Marxism-Leninism.

